hi this is pressure Locker the season
finale for the Simpsons contained a
bunch of cool math examples and I wanted
to discuss them in this video the
culmination of the episode is the
following math problem in the shape of
the M drawing three straight lines
construct nine non-overlapping triangles
this is actually a pretty difficult
puzzle I pause the episode and actually
spend 15 minutes trying to solve it I
was able to get up to three four five
six pretty easily but then I got to
seven and eight and I couldn't figure
out how to get nine non-overlapping
triangles so I suggest you try this
puzzle and if you solve it
congratulations you can pause the video
or you can just keep watching I'm going
to go through the rest of the math
examples in the episode the episode
starts off with a very mathematical joke
the Springfield math team has t-shirts
that say pi is not equal to a over B
which of course refers to the fact that
pi is irrational there's also a corny
math joke here when you solve the
expression and read it out loud you get
a very corny joke the math competition
features a bunch of different questions
this question tests whether you know the
order of operations the correct answer
of negative 27 is shown in the episode
another question test converting set
notation into interval notation this can
be done without a problem
you just make sure you have the closed
brackets on negative 3 & 4 here Lisa has
to solve an equation of x squared plus y
squared equals 17 plus 2x and also X
minus 1 squared plus y minus 8 squared
equals 34 this could be solved
graphically you could draw out the graph
for the equations and you would have the
intersection of two circles so we're
looking for two points to solve this
system of equations
the quicker way to solve it
to use algebra we can rearrange the
first expression moving 2x over to the
left-hand side and then expand out the
second equation and now we can see
there's a bunch of cancellations if we
subtract the first equation from the
second equation we'll have x squared
minus 2x + y squared all cancel out we
end up with 16 y is equal to 48 which
gives us Y is equal to 3 we can then
substitute that back into our second
equation so we'll have X minus 1 squared
+ substituting in y equals 3 in the
second equation we'll end up solving
very easily that the two solutions are
negative 2 3 & 4 3 here Bart sees the
problem of x times the root of X is
equal to X you actually don't need to do
much to solve this equation very
commonly math competitions the answers
of 0 or 1 are very common they clearly
solve this equation there will be no
other solutions here we have another
question that tests the order of
operations substituting in x equals 7 we
first evaluate the bracket of 3 plus 52
so we have 55 over 4 and then we
subtract 7 plus 1 so we end up with the
answer of five point seven five here we
have another system of equations which
looks difficult to solve we have a plus
B squared equals 25 and a minus B
squared equals 45 so what's the value of
a squared plus B squared
you might try and solve for a and B and
then you need to square a and square B
but in math competitions there's always
a trick if you expand out the two
equations we see the only difference is
one has a positive factor of two a B and
the second equation has a negative
factor of two a B so if we add the two
equations together we end up with two a
squared plus two B squared equals 70 now
we can solve for a squared plus B
squared
by dividing the equation in half so we
get the answer of 35 here we have
another system of equations which looks
like you'll have to solve for x solve
for y and then evaluate 3x plus 5y once
again there is a trick if you add up the
two equations you'll get 6x plus 10y
equals 12 then divide this in half and
you get 3x plus 5y equals 6 alright now
we will return to the puzzle we need to
find to get 9 non-overlapping triangles
drawing only 3 straight lines so let's
draw this figure em out so we have more
space to work with the first line we
want to draw will be skewed coming from
the bottom left and one intersect all
the other lines we'll draw another line
exactly symmetrical starting from the
bottom right now we have one final line
to draw and we'll draw it horizontally
and now we've created nine
non-overlapping triangles 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
8 and 9 so it's a pretty cool
construction I hope you figured it out
congratulations if he figured out I did
not come up with this answer in the
episode of Bart magically comes up with
the answer because he looks at homers
head of course his hair is in the shape
of the M and he imagines the solution by
constructing it looking at his at homers
head so it's a very cool episode I hope
you liked this video please subscribe to
my channel I make videos on math and
game theory you can catch me on my blog
mind your decisions which you can also
follow on Facebook Google+ and patreon
you can also catch me a fresh towel
occur on a bunch of social media sites
you can also check out my books on math
and game theory there's a link in the
video description thanks for watching